[Music]
six naval intelligence published
accounts on the organization and
operations of the Office of Naval
Intelligence and its marine corps
counterpart during World War two reveal
very little about the structure and
activities of these units generally the
Marine Corps collected and generated its
own combat intelligence while Oh n I
which included Marines on its staff had
combat intelligence responsibilities for
the Navy and strategic intelligence
duties for both services the office of
naval intelligence was initially
organized on a geographic basis then a
functional scheme and maintained units
in each of the naval districts and
principal fleet commands it supervised
naval anti Shaye's naval observers and
liaison officers abroad the office
apparently suffered from a fast turnover
of directors during the war years and
was handicapped as well by a limited
view on the part of the Chief of Naval
Operations as to its role according to
one official history assessing the
agency quote arguments as to the scope
of Naval Intelligence responsibilities
were frequent the position taken by CNO
during World War two was that op 16 a
navy acronym identifying Oh n I was in
effect a post-office charged with
forwarding intelligence reports and
other data to the activity in the Navy
Department most likely to need and make
use of the information that 16 had
neither the time nor the qualified
personnel to search for obscure leads in
the reports pointing to enemy intentions
with respect for example to new weapon
developments or future operations the
process of evaluating and disseminating
the information contained in
intelligence reports came in for
investigation and some criticism by the
joint congressional committee that
inquired into the attack on Pearl Harbor
it was brought out during the hearings
that the director of Naval Intelligence
had a thorough
to disseminate technical statistical and
similar information received by his
office but that he had no authority to
evaluate certain aspects of military
intelligence such as developing the
enemy's intentions nor to disseminate
such information and its evaluation
these were responsibilities of the war
plans division the questions asked the
conclusions reached and the
recommendations made by the Joint
Congressional Committee indicated the
belief that the director of Naval
Intelligence should have had more
authority to evaluate and disseminate
information of that kind the naval
authorities held however that the
responsibility for developing enemy
intentions from information gathered and
analyzed by the intelligence service and
its dissemination must be left to the
individual in the organization of the
CNO responsible for war planning it was
in general held by the Navy Department
that even the war plans officer could
not be the final arbiter in some cases
the Chief of Naval Operations the
Secretary of the Navy and even the
president might have to make the final
decision a measure of the pressing need
for military intelligence and modern
warfare was the increase in personnel
employed on such work in CNO and in the
field during World War two
in June 1938 about 60 officers and some
100 enlisted personnel and civilians
were employed in the Naval Intelligence
Division op 16 on 1st of July in 1945
the numbers stood at 543 officers 675
enlisted personnel and 330 civilians the
increase in the field was even greater
at Pearl Harbor the Naval Intelligence
Unit at the time of the attack consisted
of a few officers and enlisted personnel
at the peak during the war some 4,500
people were engaged on such work at
Pearl Harbor end quote
footnote Julius Augustus fur
administration of the Navy Department in
World
or to Washington US Government Printing
Office 1959 pages 119 and 120 and
footnote special activities developed by
the Office of Naval Intelligence during
the war seemed to be security
investigation intelligence training and
psychological warfare quote three months
before war broke out again in Europe in
1939 President Roosevelt issued an
executive memorandum recognizing the
security division as a functioning
entity of Oh n I responsible for
investigating espionage counter
espionage and sabotage just as o N eyes
undercover agents were the first
American investigators into Latin
America in search of German spies before
this country entered World War one the O
n I was the first to deal with Japanese
espionage before the FBI took over in
World War two at that time the Navy was
the only American agency with any degree
of knowledge about Japan from the
beginning of World War two the rapidly
expanding corps of investigators
literally covered the waterfront they
checked on the backgrounds of naval
civilian personnel in jobs involving the
national security investigated suspected
cases of espionage and subversive
activities guarded against sabotage
uncovered fraud in the buying or selling
of naval materials traced security leaks
and did the Navy's detective work on
crime security was their mission and
protecting the naval establishment their
goal not all threats to security
they found need to be related directly
to enemy efforts end quote footnote
Myriam Ottenberg the federal
investigators Englewood Cliffs
prentice hall 1962 page 64 and footnote
development of the intelligence training
organization and function must be
credited to then 1942 deputy director of
Naval Intelligence
Ellis M Zacharias who later wrote quote
training of personnel was our
primary problem since we had only an
inadequate intelligence school chiefly
concerned with the preparation of
officers for investigation duties known
as gumshoe activities among those in a
belittling mood complaints heard in the
field offices decided me to make
training my number one project radical
changes had to be made and I took it
upon myself to make them immediately the
old school was abolished and two new
schools were created one in Frederick
Maryland called the basic intelligence
school to introduce newcomers to the
elementary principles and techniques of
intelligence and another the advanced
intelligence school in New York to train
intelligence officers on an operational
level this second school grew out of the
realization that naval intelligence in
war has somewhat different tasks from
those of army intelligence the elements
of ground combat and the problems which
it raises are largely non-existent and
naval warfare so that what the army
calls its combat intelligence has but
limited application in the Navy what we
needed was operational intelligence an
activity between strategy and tactics
providing an intelligence everything a
commander might need to take his ships
into combat or to conduct amphibious
warfare the immense mobility of fleets
and the wide expanse of our watery
battlefield necessitated a broadening of
intelligence work too and we felt that
our operational intelligence would take
all these factors into consideration we
planned to Train hundreds of operational
intelligence officers by driving them
through a hard curriculum compressed
into a comparatively short time we
actually trained a thousand and as I now
look back upon this project and the
demands which soon poured in upon us I
feel that we were not disappointed in
our expectations my faith in lieutenant
now commander John Mathis you SNR who
headed this school was well founded his
legal mind pleasant personality
and keen investigative abilities gave me
confidence Abele assisted by an
outstanding faculty of men high in the
educational field such as lieutenant
Richard W hatch lieutenant Garrett
Mattingly and others the success of this
undertaking was assured end quote
footnote Ellis a.m. Zacharias secret
missions
the story of an intelligence officer New
York GP Putnam's sons 1946 pages 296
through 297 end footnote it was also in
1942 that oh and I embarked upon its
psychological warfare effort the first
undertaking being a carefully programmed
propaganda barrage designed to
demoralize the German Navy this was
followed by similar campaigns against
the Italian Navy and the Japanese always
operating in extreme secrecy the new
unit made its initial broadcast on
January 8th 1943 quote the establishment
of what we called the Special Warfare
branch we feared that calling it
psychological warfare branch we should
engender even greater hostility by
opponents of everything psychological
was greeted with extreme enthusiasm by
the Office of War Information which then
found cooperation with the Armed Forces
a very difficult task Elmer Davis
director of OWI became our champion and
whenever attempts were made to abolish
our branch he pleaded with our highest
echelon and borrowed time for us so that
we could continue our activities we
worked in the closest and most
harmonious cooperation with OWI which
was the sole vehicle for the
dissemination of our material the
broadcast recordings were prepared for
OWI in a studio of the Interior
Department then under the able direction
of Shannon Allen and manned with capable
technicians the broadcasts were put on
the air by OWI seven times a day three
days a week from all outlets OWI and
then had in the United States North
and Great Britain in addition we
prepared for them a program called
prisoner of war mail an arrangement by
which German and Italian prisoners kept
in this country could send greetings to
their relatives and friends in their
homelands this was the first such
attempt made in the United States and it
yielded splendid propaganda results we
also worked with OWI and drawing up
propaganda directives insofar as naval
warfare was concerned and this close
cooperation proved that a military and
civilian agency could work together
smoothly on what was undoubtedly an
important military operation end quote
crypt analysis operations were
administered by the Office of Naval
communications and the information
derived from these activities was shared
with the Office of Naval Intelligence
created in 1912 as the naval radio
service of the Bureau of navigation
naval communications was attached to the
newly created office of the Chief of
Naval Operations in 1915 as a co-equal
unit with O ni and was named the
communications division some four years
later in the Twilight before American
entry into the war an effort was made in
May of 1941 to create a special
communications intelligence monitoring
capacity for the Pacific region quote in
the middle of that month the US Navy
took an important step in the radio
intelligence field it detached a 43 year
old lieutenant commander from his
intelligence berth aboard USS
Indianapolis and assigned him to
reorganize and strengthen the radio
intelligence unit at Pearl Harbor the
officer was Joseph John Rochefort
the only man in the Navy with expertise
in three closely related and urgently
needed fields crypt analysis radio and
the Japanese language Rochefort who had
begun his career as an enlisted man had
headed the Navy's cryptographic section
from 1925 to 1927 two years later a
married man with a child he was sent
because of his outstanding abilities as
a language student to Japan a hard post
to which ordinarily only bachelor
officers were sent this three-year tour
was followed by half a year in naval
intelligence most of the next eight
years were spent at sea finally in June
of 1941
Rochefort took over the command of what
was then known as the radio unit of the
fourteenth naval district in Hawaii to
disguise its functions he renamed it the
combat intelligence unit his mission was
to find out through communications
intelligence as much as possible about
the dispositions and operations of the
Japanese Navy to this end he was to
crypt analyze all minor and one of the
two major Japanese naval crypto systems
and quote
subsequently the director of oh and I
was given an indirect role in the
operations of this unit by
simultaneously holding the position of
Assistant chief of staff for combat
intelligence in the headquarters of
commander-in-chief United States fleet
in charge of the combat intelligence
division as with all other intelligence
agencies CID began to grow after the
United States entered the war and
struggled with the challenges of 1942
quote by the next year it had changed
its name to fleet radio unit Pacific
Fleet fruit pack in the Navy's
interminable list of acronyms Rochefort
had departed in October 1942 for two
years of non Cryptologic duties he was
replaced by Captain William B Goggins 44
a 1919 Annapolis graduate with long list
communications experience Goggins who
had been wounded in the Battle of the
Java Sea remained as head of fruit pack
2 January 1945 Lieutenant Commander
Thomas H Dyer continued to head crypt
analysis eventually pre-pack comprised a
personnel of more than 1,000 much of the
work was done in the new Joint
Intelligence Center housed in a long
narrow building across Midway drive from
commander-in-chief of the Pacific Fleet
Admiral Chester W Nimitz as headquarters
perched atop a cliff overlooking Pearl
Harbor lieutenant Rudolph J Fabian in
Melbourne directed a field unit similar
to fruit pack he was on the staff of the
commander-in-chief seventh Fleet which
was attached to MacArthur's southwest
Pacific area command fruit packs growth
mirrored that of all American
cryptanalytic agencies this expansion
compelled op 20 G a navy acronym
identifying the agency to reorganize as
early as February 1942 the workload had
become too heavy for one man commander
Lawrence F Sanford the unit was split up
into sections for its three major
Cryptologic functions one the
development production and distribution
of naval cryptosystems headed by Sanford
to policing of American naval
communications to correct and prevent
security violations three crypt analysis
headed by Commander John Redmond in
September the development function was
separated from the production Sanford
retained control of the development work
until the end of the war devising such
new devices as callsign cipher machines
adaptors for British and other
cryptographic devices and offline
equipment for automatic operation about
June the Navy ceded Japanese diplomatic
solutions to the army giving over its
files as well as it's purple machine end
quote while fruit pack dealt with
Japanese codes only Washington naval
communications headquarters processed
foreign diplomatic systems and naval
ciphers used in the Atlantic Theater
these being primarily German quote the
Navy's official designation of op 20g
indicated that the agency was the Gees
section of the 20th division of op nab
the office of the chief of naval
operations
the Navy's headquarters establishment
the 20th division was the office of
naval communications and the G section
was the communications security section
this carefully chosen name masked its
cryptanalytic activities though its
duties did include US Navy cryptography
its chief was commander Lawrence F
Safford 48 a tall blond Annapolis
graduate who is the Navy's chief expert
in cryptology in January 1934 he had
become the officer in charge of the
newly created research desk in the
Navy's code and signal section here he
founded the Navy's communication
intelligence organization after C Duty
from 1926 to 1929 he returned to
Cryptologic activities for three more
years when C Duty was again made
necessary by the Manchu laws which
required officers of the army and navy
to serve in the field or at sea to win
promotion he took command of op 20 G in
1936 one of his principal
accomplishments before the outbreak of
war was the establishment of the
mid-pacific strategic direction finder
net and of a similar net for the
Atlantic where it was to play a role of
immense importance and the Battle of the
Atlantic against the u-boats Sanford's
organization enjoyed broad Cryptologic
functions it printed new editions of
codes and ciphers and distributed them
and contracted with manufacturers for
cipher machines it developed new systems
for the Navy it comprehended such sub
sections as GI which wrote reports based
on radio intelligence from the field
units and GL a record-keeping and
historical research group but its main
interest centered on crypt analysis end
quote
both Navy intelligence and naval
communications persisted as major
agencies within the office of the chief
of naval operations in the aftermath of
world war ii it would appear that in
1972 Cryptologic duties were transferred
from the naval communications
and to the naval security group command
an entity created in 1970 to manage
certain internal physical and
operational security matters in 1973 the
naval communications command became
known as the naval telecommunications
command the old office of naval
intelligence is currently called the
Naval Intelligence command this is our
hidden history
you